CORVUS SYSTEMS, INC
2029 O'Toole Avenue
San Jose, CA  95131
(408) 946-7700

Dear EdWord User:

     Welcome to the EdWord Workspace.  You are now looking at a
short-form EdWord tutorial.  This tutorial is intended to help
you become familiar with the basics of text editing with EdWord.

     The area in which this text is displayed is called the
Editing window.  Most of your word processing actions take place
in this window.  Directly below this window is another area
called the Command window.  The Command window contains various
indicators and messages that inform you about your editing
status.  On the bottom of the screen are EdWord's Function
Labels.  These Function labels indicate which function key to
press to perform various functions within EdWord.

     Look around the Editing window.  Notice the various things
that display which give the Workspace its own look.  At the top
left hand corner of the window is small blinking box.  This box is
the cursor.  The cursor indicates your current position.  You can
move the cursor with the four arrow keys located at the top right
hand corner of the Concept keyboard.

eA     eALet's begin to use EdWord.e@  With EdWord you can delete
characters one at a time or a whole row at a time.  Let's try it.
Move the cursor to the capital letter eAAe@ below this paragraph.
Then press the eADel Char e@label ten times.

Aaaa aaaa___ Bbbb bbbb___ Cccc cccc___Dddd

Next, let's clear part of the row.  Move the cursor to the capital
letter eACe@.  Press the eAErase e@label--F7.  Notice that the remainder of
the row is cleared and the cursor drops to the next line.

     If your Concept is in the horizontal orientation you need
to press eAScrlFwrde@--using the F2 key.

     In addition to deleting characters you can also insert
characters.  To do this move the cursor to the number eA1e@ of eA1983e@,
in the paragraph below and press the eAInse@ eAChare@ label--F5.  Next,
type "February 18, " while watching the change on the screen.

Today's date is 1983

     The last time you pressed eAScrlFwrde@ a large portion of this
text was moved.  If you are using your Concept in the horizontal
orientation this line appears near the bottom of the screen.  If
you are in the vertical mode you are near the top of the screen.
You should press the eAScrlFwrde@ label whenever the text reaches the
bottom of the screen.

      Move the cursor to the asterisk below this sentence, and
type "This must be centered."  Do not press the RETURN key.

eA*e@

Now hold down the COMMAND key, which is located at the lower left
corner of your keyboard.  You will see the word eACentere@ appear on
the label F8.  Hold the COMMAND key down and press F8.  Notice
that line of text was centered.  Simple, right?

     A very important function label in EdWord is eAUndoe@.  Pressing
this key will undo the last editing action you did, so you do not
have to worry about making mistakes or pressing the wrong keys.
If you press eAUndoe@ now, the line that was just centered will
disappear and the asterisk will be on the line as it was before
the change.  Try it.  The eAUndoe@ label is F3.
e@
     Let's move a paragraph.  We will move this paragraph further
down in this letter.  Put the cursor at the first column of the
blank line above this paragraph.e@  Press eAMarke@, which is the F4 key.
Move the cursor down to the first column of the last line of this
paragraph.  Hold down the SHIFT key and press eABounde@, the F4 key.

     The paragraph is highlighted, and the function labels have
changed.  Press the label eACutTexte@, which is a SHIFTed F1.  This
causes the highlighted area to disappear.

     Now let's place the paragraph at a new location.  e@ Move the
cursor to the blank line following this paragraph.  Hold down the
COMMAND key, and notice the change in the labels.  Next, press
the label named eAPasteLine@, this is the F2 key.  Watch what
happens.

     Notice that the paragraph has been successfully placed in a
new position.

     Since the eAUndoe@ command keeps track of every editing action
you do while you are working in a document, you could back up
until every change made was changed back.  Again, to demonstrate
this function you can press eAUndoe@ until the Command window displays
that there are no more events to undo.  At that time, this letter
will be the same as the original.  You can use this
letter to practice, which will help you get the feel for using
EdWord.  When you are finished, you can leave EdWord with the
eAExite@ key, SHIFTed F10.  eHPLEASE BE SURE eHTO LEAVE EDWORD BEFORE YOU
eHTURN OFF eHYOUR CONCEPT.e@e@  The EdWord User Guide has additional
information on how to use EdWord.

                                    Sincerely yours,



                                    CORVUS SYSTEMS, INC.





