
file :  trmnl.doc.text
date :  11-May-1983

Command Line interface for the terminal emulator program


General form :

TERMINAL [UnitNumber] [SendAutoLF] [RcvAutoLF] [PrinterAutoLF] [AutoEcho]

Parameters can be specified in any order.  All parameters are keyword.
Their general form is :

       Keyword=Param_Value

No blanks are allowed within a parameter.  Parameters may be in upper or
lower case letters.  Parameters are seperated by blanks.  All parameters
must appear on the same line as the TERMINAL program name.

1) UnitNumber

       Keyword : UNIT
       Values  : DC1 or DC2

                 DC1 means DataCom 1 is the primary terminal link.

                 DC2 means DataCom 2 is the primary terminal link.

       There is no default for this parameter.  If it is not specified
       the program prompts the user for the correct value.  If the ESCAPE
       key is pressed the program exits.

2) SendAutoLF

       Keyword : SENDALF
       Values  : ON or OFF

                 ON means Line Feed characters are sent out the primary
                 terminal link automatically after Carriage Return
                 characters.

                 OFF means Line Feed characters are not automatically
                 added to the character stream.

       Default : If SENDALF is not specified on the command line the
                 state is ON.

3) RcvAutoLF

       Keyword : RCVALF
       Values  : ON or OFF

                 ON means Line Feed operations are performed on the
                 screen automatically after Carriage Return characters.

                 OFF means Line Feed operations are not automatically
                 performed after Carriage Return characters.

       Default : If RCVALF is not specified on the command line the
                 state is ON.

4) PrinterAutoLF

       Keyword : PRNTALF
       Values  : ON or OFF

                 ON means Line Feed characters are sent to the printer
                 automatically after Carriage Return characters.

                 OFF means Line Feed characters are not automatically
                 sent after Carriage Return characters.


       Default : If PRNTALF is not specified on the command line the
                 state is ON.

5) AutoEcho

       Keyword : ECHO
       Values  : ON or OFF

                 ON means terminal echoes user input to the display
                 and any other open output devices.  Used when in Half
                 Duplex.

                 OFF means display echoes are handled by other end of
                 communication link.  Used when in Full Duplex.


       Default : If PRNTALF is not specified on the command line the
                 state is ON.


Example command lines

1)  TERMINAL UNIT=DC1 SENDALF=ON RCVALF=OFF PRNTALF=ON ECHO=OFF

    This example shows all the possible keywords all on the same line as
    the TERMINAL program name.

2)  terminal u=DC1 send=ON Rcv=off

    This example shows lower case and upper case.  The UNIT parameter is
    abbreviated to it's shortest unique string.  SENDALF and RCVALF are
    abbreviated but not to there shortest unique strings.


Function of the terminal emulator program

Generally, any characters typed at the keyboard are sent to the datacom
connection. Conversely, any characters sent from the datacom are sent to
the screen.

Characters sent from the datacom can be saved in a text file while they
are being displayed on the screen.  Just press the FILE function key and
the program will ask for the file name.  If the [ESC] key is pressed the
program does not use send characters to a file.  If just the [RETURN] key
is pressed the program uses the default file name, "...ECHO.TEXT".

Characters will be sent to the file until the user exits the program or
presses the FILE function key again.  The file is closed and will be
available for editing with EDWORD or spooling.

If a local printer is available, the characters sent by the datacom may
also be sent to the printer.  Press the PRINTER function key to send
characters to the printer.  Press it again to stop.  Characters will
then appear on the screen and the printer.

Characters maybe sent to the printer and a file at the same time.

To exit the program press the EXIT function key, F10.
