

         From: Keith Ball
         File: C2.SCHED.TEXT
         Date: 17-February-1984

         Re:  Constellation II.1 schedule

         Based on discussions with Bob and Denise.  Work load derived
         from Bob's status report.

         Machines considered are the IBM PC with MSDOS 2.0 and the
         p-system for our own applications and the Concept.

         People pool :

         1) Bruce K. MSDOS drivers
         2) Denise   Const 2 utils
         3) Dibinh   MSDOS drivers and user utils
         4) Keith    Concept system
         5) Tri      user utils
         6) Bill K. - probably not available.  Most likely doing IBM
                      rom changes, TI & 1.1 omnidrive and Mirror
                      server.  He wants to do spooler driver on PC
                      for MSDOS 2.0.
         7) Pan - he works for Phil B. Since Phil needs new system
                  software for UBI gateway on PC, maybe have him
                  available.

         Divide the work into 2 phases :

         1) software developed with current system configuration
         2) new system development

         Do part 1 first.

         a) Volume locking
               - lock, unlock, Const 2 table changes
               - 1 person 1 month
         b) Spool drivers
               - driver and utility
               - 1 person 1 month
         c) logoff program
               - goodbye, close pipes, release locked volumes
               - 1 person 1 month

         Volume locking and spool drivers can be done concurrently if
         two people work on it.  The logoff program is dependent on
         them.  The first finished could do the logoff.

         If this is started by March 5 it could be completed for
         testing by the end of May.


         Not enough personnel to allocate to task.  Maybe Bill on
         spooler driver for PC.  He could do it between omnidrive
         changes and Mirror server??? I could do Concept changes.
         Volume locking requires Denise to make table changes.



         Do part 2 second.

         a) generic transporter driver
               - driver
               - 1 person 2 months, minimum per system

         b) new disk driver - new timeout mechanism, different mount
                              table
               - driver, logon and system, user and diag utilities
               - 1 person 2 months for driver and logon
               - 1 person 1 month for all utilities

         c) command line spooling with parameter file
               - Tri is currently working on this
               - Concept has command line but not parameter file

         d) command line mount and unmount
               - ??
               - Tri ?
         e) Speed up Const 2 utils under p-system and add batch files
            to generate tables
               - Denise says 2 weeks to setup development network
                 plus 1 month to do work


         The biggest change is the transporter driver and the new disk
         driver/mount tables change.  The only reason why it is only 2
         months because most of the design work is already done.  They
         can be done concurrently.  The utility changes, except for
         the diag writing the timeout status info, can be started but
         not tried until after they are done.  Involves new CDsend and
         CDrecv interface.  Maybe add a CDinit and keep timeout and
         retry info in static vars.   Bruce and Dibinh do PC drivers
         and I can make changes for Concept.  Concept does not (????)
         require a new transporter driver.  Utilities changes can be
         made by Denise.


